In the previous code challenge, I discussed that processing one token at a time might not be really
representative of how the model processes tokens in general.
On the other hand, when tokens are processed in a text, then they're not actually processed in isolation,
but are strongly impacted and modulated by the rest of the text.
So that means that it's really difficult, possibly just not even possible, to even consider what it
would mean for a model to process a token in its pure form, the way that you and I can think about
an individual word.
Anyway, that is the challenge, but also the important concept of how llms work that we will explore
in this code challenge.
We will continue working with the same MLP neurons that we isolated in the previous video.
In fact, exercise one is really just a copy and paste some of the code from the previous code challenge.
In particular, import the Eleuther model, implant the same hook, and import the 100 common nouns,
all from the previous code challenge.
You don't need to import the verbs for this code challenge.
So that's it for this exercise, it's really just copy pasting into a new notebook file.
I will switch to code, but just very briefly just to show the code that I copied.
Over here are the libraries that we will use.
And here I'm importing the model.
And actually one very slight difference here compared to the previous code challenge, is that I actually
am using the GPU for this code challenge.
It's not really necessary.
You can still do this on the CPU.
I chose to use the GPU here just to save a little bit of time later on.
Okay, so import the model.
Here is the hook function exactly the same as the previous code challenge.
And here I'm importing the nouns exactly the same as in the previous code challenge.
Now let's start doing some analyses.
The goal here will be to measure the activations for those 100 words.
So the 100 nouns from the previous code challenge that you imported in exercise one, but with and without
preceding spaces.
As you know from the beginning of the course on tokenization, the GPT two tokenizer has a lot of words
that actually start with spaces, because that's how they often appear in actual text.
But the list of nouns that we are working with from the previous code challenge, and that we just imported,
those do not start with spaces.
They start with characters.
So the goal here is to repeat the for loop and get all of the activations for all the individual words.
But now you want to do it twice, once just for the word itself, and then again with the same word,
but adding a space before the word appears.
Now once you have those activations, you can visualize them in a few different ways.
Here on the left is a scatter plot where you can show the activations for the words with no space versus
the activations for the same words, but with a preceding space.
And I also set the color of each dot.
You don't see this here, but the color of each dot.
In this scatter plot, I defined to be the absolute value of the difference in the activation between
the two axes.
And then I took the square root of that difference, basically just to make the color look nice.
But don't worry about the visual aesthetics.
You can see in the title that I've also calculated the correlation coefficient between these two pairs
of activations.
So that's the scatter plot over here.
Here on the right is our histograms of the activations across all of the MLP neurons from this one transformer
block for the words with the space and without the space.
So that's it for this exercise.
You can now pause the video and start coding away.
And now I will switch to code.
Let me actually begin by.
Let's have a look at some of these nouns.
I just want to make sure it's clear.
So let's start with school because that's a good word.
So we have school and then we have I'm going to tokenize it tokenizer dot encode.
And this happens to be index 14,347.
But if I put a space beforehand, this is going to be a different token.
So this you will remember from the very beginning of the course.
But basically the idea is that we have different tokens for words with versus without preceding spaces.
And that means that the model might process these words differently depending on a preceding space.
Okay, so that is just a little demo of why we are doing exercise two.
All of this code here looks really, really similar to the code from exercise two.
In the previous code challenge, it's mostly copy pasted.
You can see the main thing that I changed here was instead of selecting for one particular noun, and
here was one particular verb.
Here we're just looping over all of the nouns.
And here I just have the word.
I actually really don't need this stuff here.
This is fine.
And then here I'm just having a space in front of the word okay.
Otherwise the code is basically the same.
Essentially we are doing a forward pass on one token.
Kind of weird.
There's no context, but that's what we're doing here.
And then extracting the activations from all of the MLP neurons from this one layer.
Okay.
And then here is where I'm generating the plot.
So here I flatten out all of the activations.
That's because this is for 100 words and 3000 neurons.
And then I'm flattening them or vectorizing them to be one vector.
And then yeah, it's just for convenience for the plotting.
Okay.
And then here is the difference that I'm using for color coding.
So the difference between them and then the absolute value.
So you can think of that as like the L1 distance between the two activations.
And then I square root and then I divide by the max.
There is no, like, deep, meaningful, uh, theoretical or mathematical motivation for this transform.
It just makes the plot look nice and easy to see the colors.
Okay, so here's where I make the scatter plot of Without Space by with a space.
Uh, and I'm setting the color to be the difference values.
I'm using the map plasma reverse.
I like this color map, and I found reverse just looks nicer for this plot.
Again, with visualization.
You know, sometimes there are decisions that you make when visualizing data that are based on meaningful
theoretical considerations, and sometimes it's just personal preferences.
Okay, here I am creating histograms.
And yeah these are going to be density based histograms.
And yeah.
So let's have a look at the plots and see what we can see.
So again here on the x axis is the nouns with no preceding space.
And here is with a preceding space.
All of these yellow lines that lie exactly on the line of unity.
Those correspond to basically the activations of the neurons are nearly identical, possibly really
identical, but at least close to identical processing for the two different tokens.
Uh, even though, yeah, we humans would recognize it as the same word, but these models recognize
them as different tokens, although, of course, they learn through lots of training that, uh, the
words should be processed in very similar ways.
Uh, they are the two activation patterns are very strongly correlated with each other.
But you can see that there are some differences.
So the model really is processing the words differently, the tokens differently depending on whether
there is no space or with a space preceding, uh, looks like most of them kind of lie close to the
diagonal.
There are a couple of weirdos out here.
I'm not sure what's going on with these.
You could find out.
You can see that these are the deepest color purple from plasma.
So if you want to know which words, which tokens these correspond to, what you could do is look for
the largest differences.
So where is this variable maximum.
And then go back and find those words and those tokens.
Right.
There's a lot of dots in here.
Each dot corresponds to one word from one token.
That's all vectorized from that big matrix okay.
And then here we see the histograms.
They are not exactly identical but basically identical really really similar.
So this indicates that the model is processing these words very very similarly depending regardless
of whether they have a preceding space or no preceding space, even though they are technically different
tokens.
in exercise two, there was still no context, no text, just individual words that we'd put a space
in front of.
Still, words don't appear in isolation anywhere when pre-training or fine tuning these models, so
it's still a little bit artificial.
So therefore the goal of exercise three and four is to compare the processing of individual tokens with
the exact same tokens that are embedded in a text.
So to get some text for this analysis, you can actually have the model generate text on its own.
You can generate 200 tokens starting from some short sequence that you can define.
I chose to start the model off with the text.
I think the world could be better if.
And then I generated new tokens up to a total of 200 tokens to see what the model thinks would make
the world a better place.
So when you get this text that the model generated using the generate method, then take those tokens,
the generated tokens, and push them back through the same model.
To get the MLP neuron activations, you should get an activation matrix of size one by 200 by 3072,
corresponding to one sequence of 200 tokens in this batch and 3000 MLP neurons.
We are going to analyze these data in the next exercise, but for now you can switch to code and just
get those activations.
And now I will also switch to code and show my results.
I think the world could be better if you know what I love about GPT two, GPT two makes you think and
GPT four tries to do your thinking for you.
I always really enjoy interacting with GPT two.
Here I'm specifying 200 tokens maximum and remember from earlier in the course that this means that
we get 200 tokens in total, which includes however many tokens this is.
So this really means maybe like 190 tokens that the model generates, plus, you know, approximately
ten or whatever, however many tokens this is that I wrote.
Of course, for these purposes, that's fine.
I'm just giving you a reminder about that.
So I think the world could be better if we just kept moving forward to a new world where we can do anything
we want.
And if our leaders could really work together, that is such a true statement, man.
So now I take all of those generated tokens and then push them back through the model.
So these are the tokens outputted.
And then these are the tokens that I push right back through the model in order to get the activations
here.
So it's 200 by 3000.
And here I'm just setting another variable just to get these activations into a different variable.
That's going to make it more convenient to go through the analysis in the next exercise.
Now for the final exercise in this code challenge.
Now that you have all the activations for all 200 tokens together as one sequence, get all of the activations
from the individual neurons again, but now in a for loop over each token individually.
So that means you're going to have two sets of activations from all of the MLP neurons, one set of
activations coming from the tokens processed embedded in the text.
That's what you did in exercise three.
And then another set of activations from all of the tokens processed individually, pushed individually,
one at a time through the model.
And that's what you're going to do in this exercise.
Then you can generate a figure that is basically the same as the one that you created in exercise two,
except that was about having spaces or not having preceding spaces.
And now here this is about the activations for the isolated tokens pushed through the model, one at
a time, versus the tokens from the text that are embedded in the text.
And then one thing I added over here is the difference between the activations as a histogram.
I hope you find this exercise to be thought provoking and interesting.
And I will now switch to code and discuss the results.
So here in this for loop, I'm looping over all of the generated tokens, pushing one token at a time
through the model getting its activation here, and then also copying over the activation from when
I pushed all of the tokens together as one sequence through the model.
This is the variable that I created at the end of exercise three.
Okay, so let's run that.
That will take a few seconds.
If you're doing this on the CPU it will take a few additional seconds.
But overall it's not so bad with this model okay.
And then here yeah this code is basically identical to the code for exercise two.
The only thing I added was this line here where I am getting the histogram of the difference in the
activations for the two sets of analyses.
So in the text versus individual tokens.
So let's see what those look like.
These look quite different from the results from exercise two.
Remember in exercise two we found that whether there is a space or isn't a preceding space didn't really
matter.
The activations were technically a little bit different, but they were still really, really similar.
But now we see much more differences, much stronger differences between the two pairs of tokens.
And again, remember every one of these dots here corresponds to literally exactly the same token activation
in exactly the same MLP neuron.
The only difference is that on the y axis we have when the tokens were pushed through one at a time
in a for loop, and with no preceding context versus the x axis, where every token except for the first
I guess, but every other token has at least some context behind it.
There are tokens behind that individual token that allow the model to modulate the processing and the
representation of that individual embeddings vector.
And then here we see the corresponding activations.
So really quite striking I find.
And then you see also in these histograms.
Now do not be confused by the similarity between the histograms for the blue line and the orange line.
What those show is that the marginal distributions cover, you know, the same range, roughly the same
range of activation numerical values.
It is very possible for the distributions to be overall very similar.
And yet the differences between individual pairs to be very different.
And that's why the green histogram is basically just as wide as the distributions from the individual
variables.
So let me explain that again.
So basically the blue line and the orange line correspond to the Uh, distributions over the x axis
or like projected onto the x axis, projected onto the y axis.
The green line actually shows the histogram of this like diagonal, this orthogonal projection from
each of these dots onto the line of unity, which you can basically see as these yellow colors over
here.
So we do see that there are tokens and neurons where the processing is really, really similar, regardless
of whether the token is presented in a context or without any context.
But a lot of the neurons have some modulation by context.
And that's why you see the colors and the shifts off the diagonal.
One of the challenges of Mcinturff research is that llms have no representation of isolated words,
because they have never been trained on isolated words.
They are pre-trained on really, really long sequences of text.
Of course, that's not a problem.
It's not a limitation of the models.
That is exactly what makes them so impressive and so versatile.
But it is really a challenge for Mcinturff research, in particular with reproducibility, because findings
that might work for certain contexts might not work for other contexts.
For scientific purposes, it would be ideal if we could isolate the processing of different tokens completely
with no regard to contextual influences, just like how in physics you can run simulations and make
calculations without friction, without any interactions from other objects and other forces.
That's just not possible in Llms.
And that is a really interesting challenge for research into LLM mechanisms.